hi I'm Steve Clemens and I have a
question after months of death and
destruction in Gaza how much room will
there be for diplomacy between
Palestinians and Israelis let's get to
the bottom
line in terms of the killing of innocent
civilians Israel's war on Gaza has
shocked the world and outpaced most if
not all conflict zones in the 21st
century worse than some of the deadliest
moments of the US war in Iraq and the US
battle against Isis in raqa Syria now
most of the 2.3 million Palestinians in
the Gaza Strip have been displaced food
is in limited Supply and most hospitals
have been destroyed Israel says it's
responding to the attack of Hamas on
Israel in October that killed hundreds
of Israeli soldiers and civilians and
trying to make sure that Hamas can't
wage an attack like that ever again but
is it strategy which has the backing of
its Patron superpower the United States
really working and what happens when the
fighting ends and the Palestinians and
Israelis have to find a way to live
together as neighbors all over again
today we're talking with David from
former speech writer and assistant to
President George W bush currently a
writer at the Atlantic magazine and most
recently the author of trump apocalypse
restoring American democracy David thank
you so much for joining us today look
this is a painful and horrible subject
which we have all the eyeballs in the
world are watching October 7th you know
precipitated a response from Israel that
brought the Israeli left and right
together in response to BAS basically
eradicate uh Hamas and I was caught by
your a tweet thread that you tweeted out
that began to look at beyond the whr
what do we do when the conflict ends and
there is the day after tell us what you
think are the important features of the
day after we need to think about I start
with this as in this matter as a strong
supporter of Israel and a strong uh
support of the US Israeli relationship
um like many American Jews I have family
on the front lines and one of my
relatives the second cousin is is in
captivity as you and I speak um he is
being he is a prisoner of of Hamas and
probably has been exposed to
considerable abuse um so we all have a
lot of heart in this story but we also
need our heads because every war must
end major combat operations in Gaza will
end um I expect and I hope that they
will end with um tremendous damage to
the command structure of Hamas but that
will as you say leave behind millions of
people and mountains of rubble um how do
those people survive how do they eat
what what happens next and how do you
come up with some kind of security
regimen um to make sure that uh peace is
restored and that people can go about
their lives so um there have been a
number of ideas floated and that's where
you and I began our conversation could
Israel reoccupy Gaza that seems utterly
unworkable will an international force
of some kind arrive in Gaza I don't
think you're going to find many
Europeans willing to do that because of
the risk of being exposed to terrorist
attack uh from whatever remains of of
Hamas or other kinds of uh successor
groups um could uh a confederation of
Arab governments uh do it well you know
better than I how little cooperation
there is between Arab governments how
much disagreement could the United
Nations step in well they have utterly
discredited themselves they have acted
as fronts for Hamas um through their
Refugee organizations there's uh there's
only one security keeper you can imagine
having legitimacy and success and that
is some kind of revived Palestinian
Authority the world has to find a way
revived and improve Palestinian
Authority to re-enter Gaza and assume
the responsibilities of governance there
now the Palestine Authority was set up
as a temporary transitional authority to
move towards a two-state solution it
came as a result of the Oslo Accords
there are others like Salam fad whom
I've interviewed recently who think the
PA has lost its legitimacy lost it role
because of the failure to deliver and
thus you need to even go back to the
precursor to that the PLO and find a new
way to get legitimacy so I find your
suggestion really interesting because
are you saying that you can restore the
Palestinian Authority and detach it from
a two-state horizon um I think sometimes
I I worry in the Middle East a lot about
solutionism that um you have a a vision
of a solution and uh you uh then judge
yourself by how whether you're moving
toward that solution when you have an
immediate problem I I I'm looking at the
present not the future um and just to
our audience you you're worried about
housing Water Systems you know the even
most basic necessities which you lay out
in pretty graphic detail in your tweets
about really the horrors ahead yes there
and after previous rounds of violence
between Israel and Hamas um there uh
2014 being the most recent big one um
there have there has been a lot of
International Investment to rebuild Gaza
I think um people and especially Friends
of the Palestinians need to be aware
that International Aid is not likely to
be forthcoming in the way it was before
because it went into tunnels it went
into tunnels so explain to a German
taxpayer explain to an American taxpayer
explain to explain even to people in the
Persian Gulf right how how do you
justify writing checks for hundreds of
millions of dollars given the history of
past abuse so there will be emergency
aid humanitarian aid but it will be much
more modest um and so there are
solutions that are going to have to come
from Gaza um there also are going to
have to be and I I understand you've
talked to John Bolton about this there's
going to have to be some kind of way
that people in the Gaza Strip can exit
uh to go find work uh in play and send
remittances home and one of the roles
that Persian Gulf governments can have
is that they can offer um work permits
to people willing to to try their hands
so they can earn a living because the
aid is not going to flow the way it used
to do do you see an end of work permits
for Palestinians in Israel because a lot
of the transfer payments and the
economic activity ity of both the West
Bank and Gaza was tied to the Israeli
economy and it really begs a question
will Israel play a role in rebuilding
Gaza um we H look someday this has to be
an economic unit someday it has to be
possible to get on a train in Cairo and
get off the train in Damascus with a
stop in Jerusalem in between and all I
this this area is too small for so for
so many borders and so much antagonism
um but I don't think I don't think
anytime soon there's going to be a lot
of movement from Gaza into Israel um
that trust has been forfeited um people
because even though the number of people
who did the violence is finite they do
seem to have had a lot of information
from people who were trusted so the
trust will be hard to restore um maybe
you can you can imagine some gsin if
they check out finding work permits in
the West Bank but don't look for that
border between Gaza and Israel to be
reopened anytime soon so they're going
to have to find work somewhere else
because the aid isn't going to flow the
way it used to do where can they go um
they're going to be tremendous labor
shortages in um in the Gulf States um
some will be able to go to E Egypt and
as I said this we're talking here about
remittances we're not talking about
necessarily relocating whole families
many of the receiving governments will
be reluctant uh but if you say look here
here's a group of 100 um working age men
who are looking for a 24mon work permit
so they can earn a living and send money
home to their families I hope the region
and they speak your language I hope the
region will be open open to all of that
but what the place is going to look like
it's not people are not going to are not
going to have homes to go back to or
many people will not have homes to go
back to and the water systems are
damaged and the electricity grids are
broken um and it will take a long time
to restore them and the resources for
that will be coming from inside Gaza not
So Much from the outside world anymore
as you look at things now and I've I've
interviewed a lot of friends of Israel
on this show um a lot of military
experts generals General Petraeus others
who've said Hamas what's not understood
is Hamas is not a body of individual ual
and people it's an ideology and the
notion that it can be eradicated through
this activity is mistaken we even had
the defense secretary Lou Austin saying
Israel risks strategic defeat in the
course that is going now so my question
to you and I know it's it's complicated
is Israel doing the wrong thing at this
moment to achieve its objectives of
undermining Hamas and creating a
different picture I'm not a military
expert of any kind I have no idea what I
would also say is it's maybe the wrong
question because there are things that
societies are going to do that are
inevitable um when Hamas launched the
October 7th attack attacks in such an
atrocious way it did so knowing that no
Democratic Society could fail to respond
in a correspondingly large way um it was
inevitable that Israel would respond in
this way it was intended there was and
and it just isn't that's how democracies
react when people commit such heinous
atrocities against so many of their
citizens especially targeting women and
children in the way that Hamas did um
what will happen though when the major
combat operations come to an end as they
soon will politics in Israel will begin
to resume um and there will what will
that look like you think uh well that
will look like is people demands in the
street for accountability for net uh to
depart uh you know questions about the
security establishment um the uh so
there will be a reckoning there will be
a reckoning and there there are going to
be all kinds of other interesting shifts
some people are going to be one of the
major things that happen inside Israel
uh during this conflict was um a surge
of support uh for the state from
Palestinian Israelis uh Arab
Israelis um you saw these polls it
showed an an interest a rise in
identification with the state now some
will say that was driven by fear more
than loyalty um but there has certainly
been no reaction within Israel of any
kind of security threats from uh
Palestinian Arabs who have Israeli
passports I I know a lot of Israeli
Israelis Jews and Arabs who say what did
they get from that where were the
demonstrations of appreciation for
loyalty to the state that's going to be
a major divide meanwhile there were all
kinds of settlers who in Israel's Jewish
settlers in the West Bank who in
Israel's hour of need intensified
conflict with their Arab neighbors as if
to open up yet one more front at exactly
the time when that front was least
needed so there will be disputes there I
me a lot of people are very very worried
about the West Bank right now um as an
as a as an escalation about settler
provocations there um you and I both in
been in recent meetings where I think
some government officials feel
confidence that that is going to somehow
be controlled and and reeled in by the
Israeli government but do you have that
confidence because that's one area where
I worry what are the blind spots we're
not seeing right now and if that
conflation were to hit the West Bank you
know what what that that would be really
um disturbing escalation of this I don't
see this a prediction you said what does
politics look like so one of the issues
in politics will be what happens to net
Yahoo one of the issues in politics will
be who is to blame for this security and
intelligence failure and another issue
in politics will be those who say we owe
something to the Israeli Arabs and those
who say no we owe protection to the
settlers and those two groups within
Israeli Society will argue
intensely and um uh there I think
there's going to be a reckoning as well
with the um role of the of the ultra
religious um there has been an effort to
pull the ultra religious in into the
military Israel security needs after
this war will be greater because Israel
will have to watch not only uh the north
where it always watches not only Gaza it
will have to have an eye to other kinds
of regional threats the idea that
there's this large group of people who
exempt themselves from the normal
responsibilities of citizenship because
of their Ultra religiosity that's going
to be questioned so you're going to have
a lot of politics in inside Israel I
have no idea how it will work itself out
um but the idea that there is an Israel
I mean Israel has been United in its
reaction against Hamas but there these
other questions and there will be
important debates and one of the things
the people watch this
program one of the things that um they
need to bear in mind is their own agency
in all of this the signals that Israel
gets from its neighbors um the signals
that Israel gets from the region Israel
gets from the region will be will also
have important effect um if we can move
toward resumption of normalization with
Persian Gulf countries especially Saudi
Arabia that opens more space for a less
fearful Israel to behave in ways that
empower the most generous elements in
Israeli Society if Israelis feel feel
more fearful you empower the least
generous elements in Israeli Society you
don't call for a two-state solution in
that case which some some are saying may
be dead some are saying is the only
option but as you think about what you
just said about taking pressure off
Israel decreasing the toxicity of the
moment looking at a Saudi normalization
would do you see an opportunity there um
again I want to warn against solutionism
I just think you need to take one one
step at a time um and I think all of
those hopes that were felt so intensely
in the 1990s they are so much farther
away than they were but there are things
that you can do today um and I would
emphasize as I did in that tweet um
dignity for Arab citizens of Israel um
respect equality um and having a vision
of at least there has to be someday
economic integr from The River To The
Sea economic integration um you know and
beyond the river to the Sea economic
integration um as for the Saudis I the
Biden Administration may be kidding
itself on the speed at which this is
happening because the Saudis I think
have indicated they want to play in
American politics they want to help
Republicans they want to help Donald
Trump they want to hurt Joe Biden I find
it hard to imagine that they would hand
such a major diplomatic Victory to
President Biden in 2024 perhaps if
President Biden wins re-election and
they have to deal with him in 2025 it
will happen then I would uh October 7th
no October 7th I would not have expected
a breakthrough in the coming year um but
the Saudis want it for their own
purposes the whole region has to be
demilitarized has to be normalized and
so long as there's animosity toward
Israel this will never be a normal
region of the world and the economic
prospects the Saudis imagine the Saudi
leadership imagines they Envision a
Economic Development social
normalization within an author Arian
political context well it's hard to do
that it's hard to maintain the
authoritarian politics and the normal
economy at a time of intense competition
with with this with with your neighbors
in order to make that formula work and
it's a tough formula uh you need peace
how would Donald Trump have managed this
differently you believe than than Joe
Biden Joe Biden is suffering in the
polls in part because of antipathy among
young Democrats about um how he's
dealing with Israel Palestine right now
now and what they see as being Joe Biden
is being more pro-israel than they're
comfortable with would it be ironic that
that Joe Biden loses the election
because of that loss of support to
Donald Trump over this crisis um Donald
uh I don't believe that that really will
happen um and I think that when you look
more closely at those polls you see
Biden also confronts people to his right
Democrats to his right um who say he has
not done enough um and uh the people who
are most angry at Biden about is about
his support for Israel are those who are
the least likely to vote you know one of
the questions that they ask these young
people is did you vote in 20120 and
among those who said no they did not
vote in 2020 they are much more likely
to be on the prop Palestinian side than
among those who did so if you're a
professional politician say if you don't
vote I'm I I'm interested in your
opinion as a fellow citizen but you
don't matter you don't matter uh the
people who vote they matter uh how would
Donald Trump have handled this it's
unpredictable I mean you know Trump resp
responds to very personal economic
incentives um the Saudis have enriched
his family and since he left office
they've enriched his family even more so
I think his first call would be to them
he is very interested in some of the
most reactionary elements in Israeli
Society he would have listened to them
um but because no one should ever feel
secure about any possible response it is
very possible that Donald Trump would
have done something radically
Unthinkable um and with with Biden I've
spoken to diplomats from the region and
they have said they missed Trump because
with Trump if you paid the right people
uh you could have a highway to the very
innermost Circle and then the president
could you could Prevail on him if you
got him in the right mood he might
whereas with the Biden people there's
always all this process there's this
bureaucracy um they're very concerned
with being consistent it's very
difficult to work with them but you know
what predictability is good and and
Biden has that Biden is Biden is the
most predictable politician probably in
the United States if not the world well
let me ask you about um one of the
things that's beginning to Bo is some
states and maybe this is a you know
copout with some of the hardcore
Necessities you're talking about the day
after in Gaza some states are talking
about recognizing uh Palestinian
statehood you've got Obama officials
beginning to write New York Times Obed
saying hey we need to recognize
Palestine as a state does that help get
us anywhere no it's just just I mean
think of yourself living on a street in
Gaza you've lost whatever home you had
um there's there's no potable water
you're drinking water that's maybe going
to make your kids sick um you know
there's uh there's electricity unevenly
fluctuating you're terrorized by these
gunmen who uh they bombs going off and
the idea that somebody you've never met
gets to drive to the UN in a big car
with a flag on the hood H how you need
water you need drinking water and you
need it right now you need the power to
be on you need the bombs to stop going
off you need the gunmen to be sent away
and then you need to have some hope that
the working age men in your family can
earn some kind of living and get some
kind of money to put a roof back over
your head there are ruminations that
Iran may have a breakout year next year
that it may uh in fact became a
fully-fledged 10th major nuclear power
in the world violating nonproliferation
agreements Etc but it will be there it
will be out there as you look back at
that and you know part of the issue here
is to what degree are we looking at a
proxy conflict between different parts
of the Middle East the the Iranians
versus us and the Saudis and and and
maybe it is a a mistake to look at in
that way but it does talk about what
comes next in the region and how it
could get much much worse and more
complex particularly for us interests
well when President Obama negotiated the
agreement with Iran I criticized it
because I said the benefits to Iran are
at the front of the deal and the burdens
to Iran are on the back of the deal who
negotiated this when President Trump
then said I want to cancel the deal I
said you can't cancel the deal because
the benefits to Iran are already paid
that the problem with the deal is the
thing that also makes it dangerous to C
cancel the benefits are front-loaded the
obligations are backloaded so once the
deal has been unfortunately signed you
don't want to blow it up because that's
then you blow up your hope of getting
your part of the deal which is all in
the back end but they did blow it up and
then here here we are um uh I I I think
that the IR that if the Iranians take
these
actions not understanding the potential
for violence in
2024 um that uh you you're having you
have an Israel that has lost many
inhibitions because of the October 7th
attack um you have American resources
that have been redirected into the
region because of the October 7th attack
you have a new solidarity between the
United States and Israel for all the
talk you see in the papers about
criticism um my memory stretches back to
73 and even as a boy to The Six Day War
never never has the United States given
Israel as much security permission as
it's given now this war is soon going to
be in at the three-month Mark of
intense military action intense violence
that didn't H in 1982 when Israel went
into Lebanon after the PLO they did not
get three months of per per in 1973
Israel did not get 3 months of
permission Israel has 3 months of
permission and not only from the United
States but from Great Britain and the
European Union as well Israel has never
been allowed this much scope to act and
if I were the Iranians I would take that
scope extremely seriously and just
finally David I'm I'm interested in you
know where this all goes and I and I
want to respect the fact that you you're
you know post to solutionism and and
Grand plans but what you've laid out for
the Palestinian Authority the
responsibilities and the burden it's
going to have to govern in really a
horrible postmodern situation with
millions of people um is there a way to
think about this again to get the
Palestinians to be supportive of what
you're suggesting that this may One Day
lead to an end to the occupation um I
look for Hope to the Irish model um so
the way peace arrived in Northern
Ireland was there was this intense
conflict with all kinds of cultural and
historic loyalties and the Good Friday
Accords created a dynamic whereby if you
were a Protestant British citizen living
in Northern Ireland you could have a
British passport and if you were a
Catholic uh British citizen living in
Northern Ireland you could have an Irish
passport if you wanted to think of
yourself as British you could if you
wanted to think of yourself as Irish you
could and then the border between
northern and southern Ireland as long as
went away as long as Britain remained in
the European Union and you had this
moment where the identity you carry in
your head and on your papers could be
blurred into the identity that existed
in legal reality so I I Look to that I
mean when I imagine what could the
Middle East look like I mean it I would
look to a world in which the Jews were
citizens of Israel and they might live
next door to somebody who's a citizen of
Palestine and maybe they voted for
different mayors in different lists U
but there was one economic in uh unit
that traded freely with other elements
in the region that the way the solution
to this problem is to make the borders
matter less and to make individual
identities and individual loyalties less
connected to legal and Sovereign
structures um putting National
boundaries into the Middle East has not
brought peace since the end of the
Ottoman Empire so uh obviously the
Ottomans aren't coming back but that
kind of borderless space that existed
while the Ottomans were there that is
what the Middle East is going to have to
be if it's going to live in any kind of
piece well writer and commentator David
from I really appreciate you joining us
today thank you so much thank you Steve
always a pleasure to talk so what's the
bottom line the outrage created by the
war on Gaza is going to last for
Generations in the Middle East and all
around the world at the same time the
Gaza Strip is going to have to be
rebuilt sooner or later after all this
death and destruction wrought by Israel
has it invalidated itself from governing
Gaza and the Palestinians us officials
say the Palestinian Authority is quote
the only show in town as impotent as it
may appear now so will anyone really
suddenly help create a reborn cleaned up
Palestinian Authority with greater
resources power and support from all
parties particularly the us but also
Israel and the Arab neighborhood and has
anyone bothered to ask the Palestinian
people what they'd like to have it still
looks like there are zero Alternatives
out there and that's exactly why the
International Community needs to focus
on what can be done rather than what
can't and that's the bottom
line
[Music]